new lint/format feature (#3459)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/cloud/dbt-cloud-ide/lint-format.md

add screenshot

- The **Fix** button auto-fixes errors in the **File editor**. Once you've auto-fixed, you'll see a message confirming the outcome. 

add screenshot

### Customize linting

SQLFluff is a configurable SQL linter, which means you can configure your own linting rules instead of using the default linting settings in the IDE.  

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="configure" label="Configure your own linting rules">

To configure your own linting rules:

1. Create a new file in the root project directory (the parent or top-level directory for your files)
2. Name the file `.sqlfluff` (make sure you add the `.` before `sqlfluff`)
3. Add the customize config code
4. Save and commit your changes
5. Restart the IDE??
6. Test it out and happy linting!
add screenshot

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="dbtonic" label="Configure dbtonic linting rules">

> To incorporate well-written dbt code (or dbtonic) and best practices to your linting rules, dbt Labs created the following dbtonic config code for you to save and use in your dbt project:

Reviewer: might be good to be explicit to add `.sqlfluff` file in root directory

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/cloud-ide/prettier.gif" width="95%" title="Format YAML, Markdown, and JSON files using Prettier."/>

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/cloud-ide/ide-sql-popup.jpg" width="95%" title="Use the Config button to select your tool."/>

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/cloud-ide/ide-sqlfluff-config.jpg" width="95%" title="Customize linting by configuring your own linting code rules, including dbtonic linting/styling."/>

</DocCarousel>

## Lint

With the dbt Cloud IDE, you can seamlessly use [SQLFluff](https://sqlfluff.com/), a configurable SQL linter, to warn you of complex functions, syntax, formatting, and compilation errors. This integration allows you to run checks, fix, and display any code errors directly within the Cloud IDE:

- Works with Jinja and SQL, 
- Comes with built-in [linting rules](https://docs.sqlfluff.com/en/stable/rules.html). You can also [customize](#customize-linting) your own linting rules.
- Empowers you to [enable linting](#enable-linting) with options like **Lint** (displays linting errors and recommends actions) or **Fix** (auto-fixes errors in the IDE).

> - Displays a **Code Quality** tab to view code errors, and provides code quality visibility and management. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Displays a **Code Quality** tab to view code errors and provides code quality visibility and management. 
```

### Enable linting

1. To enable linting, make sure you've opened a `.sql` file.

> 2. Click on the **`</> Config`** button on the right side of the console. 

Reviewer 2: Which console? IDE? Will this option only appear if it's a SQL file or will it persist regardless of the file type?
```suggestion
2. Click on the **`</> Config`** button on the right side of the IDE. 
```

Author: only if it's a sql file, exactly why i asked this question [here](https://dbt-labs.slack.com/archives/C012TTNN0JK/p1685707525554349?thread_ts=1685704915.113989&cid=C012TTNN0JK) last week and why i was trying to be extra clear that they need to be in a sql file

    - The **Lint** button displays linting issues in the IDE as wavy underlines in the **File editor**. You can hover over an underlined issue to display the details and actions, including a **Quick Fix** option to fix all or specific issues. After linting, you'll see a message confirming the outcome. Linting doesn't rerun after saving. Click on the **Lint** button again to rerun linting.
    - The **Fix** dropdown button auto-fixes errors in the **File editor**. Once you've auto-fixed, you'll see a message confirming the outcome. 

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/cloud-ide/ide-lint-format-console.gif" width="95%" title="Use the Lint or Fix button in the console section to lint or auto-fix your code."/>

### Customize linting

SQLFluff is a configurable SQL linter, which means you can configure your own linting rules instead of using the default linting settings in the IDE.  

To configure your own linting rules:

1. Create a new file in the root project directory (the parent or top-level directory for your files).
2. Name the file `.sqlfluff` (make sure you add the `.` before `sqlfluff`).

> 3. Add your custom config code. 

Reviewer 2: Is there a link we can provide that outlines how to create config code?

Author: i think the best reliable source is prob the sqlfluff page has that info here: https://docs.sqlfluff.com/en/stable/configuration.html#new-project-configuration

confirming with @dave-connors-3 if this is the best source?

Author: i dont want to provide non official type links since it's not the main scope of the page

Reviewer 3: that link looks ok to me!

Author: dave you da man

:::

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/cloud-ide/ide-sqlfluff-config.jpg" width="95%" title="Customize linting by configuring your own linting code rules, including dbtonic linting/styling."/>

## Format

In the dbt Cloud IDE, you can format your code to match style guides with a click of a button. The IDE integrates with formatters like sqlfmt, Prettier, and Black to automatically format code on five different file types &mdash; SQL, YAML, Markdown, Python, and JSON:

- SQL &mdash; Format with [sqlfmt](http://sqlfmt.com/), which provides one way to format your dbt SQL and Jinja.
- YAML, Markdown, and JSON &mdash; Format with [Prettier](https://prettier.io/). 
- Python &mdash; Format with [Black](https://black.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).

The Cloud IDE formatting integrations take care of manual tasks like code formatting, enabling you to focus on creating quality data models, collaborating, and driving impactful results.

### Format SQL

To format your SQL code, dbt Cloud integrates with [sqlfmt](http://sqlfmt.com/), which is an uncompromising SQL query formatter that provides one way to format the SQL query and Jinja.

To enable formatting:

1. Make sure you open a `.sql` file.

> 2. Click on the **`</> Config`** button on the right side of the console. (Make sure you're in a .sql file).

Reviewer 2: Covered in step 1
```suggestion
2. Click on the **`</> Config`** button on the right side of the console.
```

> 3. In the code quality tool config pop up, you have the option to select sqlfluff or sqlfmt. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. In the code quality tool config pop-up, you have the option to select sqlfluff or sqlfmt. 
```

4. To format your code, select the **sqlfmt** radio button. (Use sqlfluff to [lint](#linting) your code).

> 5. Once you've selected the **sqlfmt** radio button, go to the console section (located below the **File editor**) to select the **Format** button. 

Reviewer 2: Does "console section" mean different things in different steps? It's a little vague and might benefit from a more specific language, if possible.

Author: console is below the file editor: https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/cloud/dbt-cloud-ide/ide-user-interface#console-section

i can link the first reference of it to that page

### Format YAML, Markdown, JSON

To format your YAML, Markdown, or JSON code, dbt Cloud integrates with [Prettier](https://prettier.io/), which is an opinionated code formatter.

1. To enable formatting, make sure you open a `.yml`, `.md`, or `.json` file.
2. In the console section (located below the **File editor**), select the **Format** button to auto-format your code in the **File editor**. 
3. Once you've auto-formatted, you'll see a message confirming the outcome. 

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/cloud-ide/prettier.gif" width="95%" title="Format YAML, Markdown, and JSON files using Prettier."/>

### Format Python

To format your Python code, dbt Cloud integrates with [Black](https://black.readthedocs.io/en/latest/), which is an uncompromising Python code formatter.

1. To enable formatting, make sure you open a `.py` file.
2. In the console section (located below the **File editor**), select the **Format** button to auto-format your code in the **File editor**. 
3. Once you've auto-formatted, you'll see a message confirming the outcome. 

## Troubleshooting

<details>
<summary>Can I nest <code>.sqlfluff</code> files?</summary>

> To ensure optimal code quality, it's highly recommended you have one main `.sqlfluff` configuration file in the root folder of your project. However, you have the flexibility to customize and include an additional child `.sqlfluff` configuration file within specific subfolders of your dbt project. <br /><br />By nesting a `.sqlfluff` file in a subfolder, SQLFluff will apply the rules defined in that subfolder's configuration file to any files located within it. For all other files and folders outside of the subfolder, the rules specified in the parent `.sqlfluff` file will be used. This hierarchical approach allows for tailored linting rules while maintaining consistency throughout your project. Refer to [SQLFluff documentation](https://docs.sqlfluff.com/en/stable/configuration.html#configuration-files) for more info.

Reviewer 2: We might want to include the downsides of having child files if we're going to use strong language recommending against it.

Author: @bossnunta @dave-connors-3 can you provide what the downsides could possibly be to address Matt's question?

Reviewer 3: i think we can take a strong stance that multiple files leaves the door open to multiple sql styles and therefore inconsistent code.

</details>
<details>
<summary>Can I nest <code>.sqlfluff</code> files?</summary>

> To ensure optimal code quality, it's highly recommended you have one main `.sqlfluff` configuration file in the root folder of your project. However, you have the flexibility to customize and include an additional child `.sqlfluff` configuration file within specific subfolders of your dbt project. <br /><br />By nesting a `.sqlfluff` file in a subfolder, SQLFluff will apply the rules defined in that subfolder's configuration file to any files located within it. For all other files and folders outside of the subfolder, the rules specified in the parent `.sqlfluff` file will be used. This hierarchical approach allows for tailored linting rules while maintaining consistency throughout your project. Refer to [SQLFluff documentation](https://docs.sqlfluff.com/en/stable/configuration.html#configuration-files) for more info.

Reviewer 2: Same feedback as above

---
title: "Lint and format your code"
id: "lint-format"
description: Integrate with popular linters and formatters like SQL Fluff, sqlfmt, Black, and Prettier."
sidebar_label: "Lint and format"
tags: [IDE]
---

Enhance your development workflow by integrating with popular linters and formatters like [SQLFluff](https://sqlfluff.com/), [sqlfmt](http://sqlfmt.com/), [Black](https://black.readthedocs.io/en/latest/), and [Prettier](https://prettier.io/). Leverage these powerful tools directly in the dbt Cloud IDE without interrupting your development flow.

<details>
<summary>What are linters and formatters? </summary>
Linters analyze code for errors, bugs, and style issues, while formatters fix style and formatting rules. 
</details>

In the dbt Cloud IDE, you have the capability to perform linting, auto-fix, and formatting on five different file types:
 
- SQL &mdash; [Lint](#lint) and fix with SQLFluff, and [format](#format) with sqlfmt
- YAML, Markdown, and JSON &mdash; Format with Prettier
- Python &mdash; Format with Black

> In the dbt Cloud IDE, each file type has its own unique linting and formatting rules. You have the option to [customize](#customize-linting) the linting process to add more flexibility and enhance problem/style detection. 

Author: ```suggestion
Each file type has its own unique linting and formatting rules. You can [customize](#customize-linting) the linting process to add more flexibility and enhance problem and style detection.
```

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/cloud-ide/ide-sql-popup.jpg" width="95%" title="Use the Config button to select your tool."/>

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/cloud-ide/ide-sqlfluff-config.jpg" width="95%" title="Customize linting by configuring your own linting code rules, including dbtonic linting/styling."/>

</DocCarousel>

## Lint

With the dbt Cloud IDE, you can seamlessly use [SQLFluff](https://sqlfluff.com/), a configurable SQL linter, to warn you of complex functions, syntax, formatting, and compilation errors. This integration allows you to run checks, fix, and display any code errors directly within the Cloud IDE:

- Works with Jinja and SQL, 
- Comes with built-in [linting rules](https://docs.sqlfluff.com/en/stable/rules.html). You can also [customize](#customize-linting) your own linting rules.
- Empowers you to [enable linting](#enable-linting) with options like **Lint** (displays linting errors and recommends actions) or **Fix** (auto-fixes errors in the IDE).
- Displays a **Code Quality** tab to view code errors, and provides code quality visibility and management. 

### Enable linting

1. To enable linting, make sure you've opened a `.sql` file.

> 2. Click on the **`</> Config`** button on the right side of the [console](/docs/cloud/dbt-cloud-ide/ide-user-interface#console-section). 

Author: ```suggestion
2. Click on the **`</> Config`** button on the bottom right side of the [console section](/docs/cloud/dbt-cloud-ide/ide-user-interface#console-section). 
```

> 2. Click on the **`</> Config`** button on the bottom right side of the [console section](/docs/cloud/dbt-cloud-ide/ide-user-interface#console-section). 

Author: ```suggestion
2. Click on the **`</> Config`** button on the bottom right side of the [console section](/docs/cloud/dbt-cloud-ide/ide-user-interface#console-section), below the **File editor**. 
```

3. In the code quality tool config pop up, you have the option to select **sqlfluff** or **sqlfmt**. 
4. To lint your code, select the **sqlfluff** radio button. (Use sqlfmt to [format](#format) your code)

> 5. Once you've selected the **sqlfluff** radio button, go to the console section (located below the **File editor**) to select the **Lint** or **Fix** dropdown button:

Author: ```suggestion
5. Once you've selected the **sqlfluff** radio button, go back to the console section (below the **File editor**) to select the **Lint** or **Fix** dropdown button:
```

    - The **Lint** button displays linting issues in the IDE as wavy underlines in the **File editor**. You can hover over an underlined issue to display the details and actions, including a **Quick Fix** option to fix all or specific issues. After linting, you'll see a message confirming the outcome. Linting doesn't rerun after saving. Click on the **Lint** button again to rerun linting.
    - The **Fix** dropdown button auto-fixes errors in the **File editor**. Once you've auto-fixed, you'll see a message confirming the outcome. 

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/cloud-ide/ide-lint-format-console.gif" width="95%" title="Use the Lint or Fix button in the console section to lint or auto-fix your code."/>

### Customize linting

SQLFluff is a configurable SQL linter, which means you can configure your own linting rules instead of using the default linting settings in the IDE.  

To configure your own linting rules:

1. Create a new file in the root project directory (the parent or top-level directory for your files).
2. Name the file `.sqlfluff` (make sure you add the `.` before `sqlfluff`).

> 3. Add your custom config code. 

Author: ```suggestion
3. [Create](https://docs.sqlfluff.com/en/stable/configuration.html#new-project-configuration) and add your custom config code. 
```

:::

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/cloud-ide/ide-sqlfluff-config.jpg" width="95%" title="Customize linting by configuring your own linting code rules, including dbtonic linting/styling."/>

## Format

In the dbt Cloud IDE, you can format your code to match style guides with a click of a button. The IDE integrates with formatters like sqlfmt, Prettier, and Black to automatically format code on five different file types &mdash; SQL, YAML, Markdown, Python, and JSON:

- SQL &mdash; Format with [sqlfmt](http://sqlfmt.com/), which provides one way to format your dbt SQL and Jinja.
- YAML, Markdown, and JSON &mdash; Format with [Prettier](https://prettier.io/). 
- Python &mdash; Format with [Black](https://black.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).

The Cloud IDE formatting integrations take care of manual tasks like code formatting, enabling you to focus on creating quality data models, collaborating, and driving impactful results.

### Format SQL

To format your SQL code, dbt Cloud integrates with [sqlfmt](http://sqlfmt.com/), which is an uncompromising SQL query formatter that provides one way to format the SQL query and Jinja.

To enable formatting:

1. Make sure you open a `.sql` file.

> 2. Click on the **`</> Config`** button on the right side of the console. (Make sure you're in a .sql file).

Author: ```suggestion
2. Click on the **`</> Config`** button on the right side of the console.
```

> 3. In the code quality tool config pop up, you have the option to select sqlfluff or sqlfmt. 

Author: ```suggestion
3. In the code quality tool config pop-up, you have the option to select sqlfluff or sqlfmt.
```

1. To enable formatting, make sure you open a `.yml`, `.md`, or `.json` file.
2. In the console section (located below the **File editor**), select the **Format** button to auto-format your code in the **File editor**. 
3. Once you've auto-formatted, you'll see a message confirming the outcome. 

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/cloud-ide/prettier.gif" width="95%" title="Format YAML, Markdown, and JSON files using Prettier."/>

### Format Python

To format your Python code, dbt Cloud integrates with [Black](https://black.readthedocs.io/en/latest/), which is an uncompromising Python code formatter.

1. To enable formatting, make sure you open a `.py` file.
2. In the console section (located below the **File editor**), select the **Format** button to auto-format your code in the **File editor**. 
3. Once you've auto-formatted, you'll see a message confirming the outcome. 

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/cloud-ide/python-black.gif" width="95%" title="Format Python files using Black."/>

## Troubleshooting

<details>
<summary>Can I nest <code>.sqlfluff</code> files?</summary>

> To ensure optimal code quality, it's highly recommended you have one main `.sqlfluff` configuration file in the root folder of your project. However, you have the flexibility to customize and include an additional child `.sqlfluff` configuration file within specific subfolders of your dbt project. <br /><br />By nesting a `.sqlfluff` file in a subfolder, SQLFluff will apply the rules defined in that subfolder's configuration file to any files located within it. For all other files and folders outside of the subfolder, the rules specified in the parent `.sqlfluff` file will be used. This hierarchical approach allows for tailored linting rules while maintaining consistency throughout your project. Refer to [SQLFluff documentation](https://docs.sqlfluff.com/en/stable/configuration.html#configuration-files) for more info.

Author: ```suggestion
To ensure optimal code quality, consistent code, and styles, it's highly recommended you have one main `.sqlfluff` configuration file in the root folder of your project. Having multiple files can result in various different SQL styles in your project. <br /><br />

However, you can customize and include an additional child `.sqlfluff` configuration file within specific subfolders of your dbt project. <br /><br />By nesting a `.sqlfluff` file in a subfolder, SQLFluff will apply the rules defined in that subfolder's configuration file to any files located within it. The rules specified in the parent `.sqlfluff` file will be used for all other files and folders outside of the subfolder. This hierarchical approach allows for tailored linting rules while maintaining consistency throughout your project. Refer to [SQLFluff documentation](https://docs.sqlfluff.com/en/stable/configuration.html#configuration-files) for more info.
```

</details>
<details>
<summary>Can I nest <code>.sqlfluff</code> files?</summary>

To ensure optimal code quality, it's highly recommended you have one main `.sqlfluff` configuration file in the root folder of your project. However, you have the flexibility to customize and include an additional child `.sqlfluff` configuration file within specific subfolders of your dbt project. <br /><br />By nesting a `.sqlfluff` file in a subfolder, SQLFluff will apply the rules defined in that subfolder's configuration file to any files located within it. For all other files and folders outside of the subfolder, the rules specified in the parent `.sqlfluff` file will be used. This hierarchical approach allows for tailored linting rules while maintaining consistency throughout your project. Refer to [SQLFluff documentation](https://docs.sqlfluff.com/en/stable/configuration.html#configuration-files) for more info.

</details>

## Next steps

- [dbt Cloud IDE](/docs/cloud/dbt-cloud-ide/develop-in-the-cloud)

> - [Tips and tricks](/docs/cloud/dbt-cloud-ide/dbt-cloud-tips)

Reviewer 4: looking at the deploy preview: 

![Screenshot 2023-06-08 at 8 27 33 AM](https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/assets/107218380/10b08af5-baa3-4723-8c94-a936e2e54bed)

- is there a duplicate in the Troubleshooting section? sugg removing the dupe 
- the links in the Next steps section look to be the same as the links in the footer. sugg removing the Next steps section

Author: done, thank you Ly!

---
title: "Lint and format your code"
id: "lint-format"
description: Integrate with popular linters and formatters like SQL Fluff, sqlfmt, Black, and Prettier."
sidebar_label: "Lint and format"
tags: [IDE]
---

> Enhance your development workflow to focus on code quality by integrating with popular linters and formatters like [SQLFluff](https://sqlfluff.com/), [sqlfmt](http://sqlfmt.com/), [Black](https://black.readthedocs.io/en/latest/), and [Prettier](https://prettier.io/). Leverage these powerful tools directly in the dbt Cloud IDE without interrupting your development flow.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Enhance your development workflow by integrating with popular linters and formatters like [SQLFluff](https://sqlfluff.com/), [sqlfmt](http://sqlfmt.com/), [Black](https://black.readthedocs.io/en/latest/), and [Prettier](https://prettier.io/). Leverage these powerful tools directly in the dbt Cloud IDE without interrupting your development flow.
```

<details>
<summary>What are linters and formatters? </summary>
Linters analyze code for errors, bugs, and style issues, while formatters fix style and formatting rules. 
</details>

In the dbt Cloud IDE, you have the capability to perform linting and formatting on five different file types (SQL, YAML, Markdown, JSON, and Python):
 

> - SQL &mdash; [Lint](#lint) with SQLFluff and [format](#format) with sqlfmt

Author: ```suggestion
- SQL &mdash; [Lint](#lint) and fix with SQLFluff, and [format](#format) with sqlfmt
```

> - SQL &mdash; [Lint](#lint) with SQLFluff and [format](#format) with sqlfmt

Reviewer 3: you can also `Fix` with sqlfluff!

Author: ah-mazing @dave-connors-3 ! i'm going to change this line to add 'fix' so appreciate your feedback 🙏

- YAML, Markdown, and JSON &mdash; Format with Prettier
- Python &mdash; Format with Black

> In the dbt Cloud IDE, each file type has its own unique linting and formatting rules. You have the option to [customize](#customize-linting) the linting process to add more flexibility and enhance problem/style detection. 

Reviewer 2: It's a little repetitive; we covered that we're in the IDE in the opening statement
```suggestion
Each file type has its own unique linting and formatting rules. You can [customize](#customize-linting) the linting process to add more flexibility and enhance problem and style detection. 
```

> By default, the IDE uses sqlfmt to format your code, making it convenient to use right away. This means that the IDE will format your code using the sqlfmt rules. However, if you have a file named ".sqlfluff" in the root directory of your dbt project, the IDE will default to SQLFluff instead.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By default, the IDE uses sqlfmt to format your code, making it convenient to use right away. This means that the IDE will format your code using the sqlfmt rules. However, if you have a file named `.sqlfluff` in the root directory of your dbt project, the IDE will default to SQLFluff instead.
```

### Format YAML, Markdown, JSON

To format your YAML, Markdown, or JSON code, dbt Cloud integrates with [Prettier](https://prettier.io/), which is an opinionated code formatter.

1. To enable formatting, make sure you open a `.yml`, `.md`, or `.json` file.
2. In the console section (located below the **File editor**), select the **Format** button to auto-format your code in the **File editor**. 
3. Once you've auto-formatted, you'll see a message confirming the outcome. 

<Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/cloud-ide/prettier.gif" width="95%" title="Format YAML, Markdown, and JSON files using Prettier."/>

### Format Python

To format your Python code, dbt Cloud integrates with [Black](https://black.readthedocs.io/en/latest/), which is an uncompromising Python code formatter.

1. To enable formatting, make sure you open a `.py` file.
2. In the console section (located below the **File editor**), select the **Format** button to auto-format your code in the **File editor**. 
3. Once you've auto-formatted, you'll see a message confirming the outcome. 

## Troubleshooting

<details>

> <summary>Can I nest <code>.sqlfluff</code> files?</summary>

Author: I added this here because according to Nate's loom video, it's not something we encourage but it is something that's technically possible. 

I'm pretty confident users will be asking or thinking about this so I added it as a subtle toggle so it's not entirely easy to find, but it is available
